# Release Notes
<!-- Do not edit this file! This file is autogenerated with -->
<!--   tools/autotag/tag_script.py                          -->

<!-- Disable lints since this is an auto-generated file.    -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable blanks-around-headers             -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable no-duplicate-header               -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable no-blanks-blockquote              -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable ul-indent                         -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable no-trailing-spaces                -->

<!-- spellcheck-disable -->

The release notes for the ROCm platform.

-------------------

## ROCm 5.1.0
<!-- markdownlint-disable first-line-h1 -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable no-blanks-blockquote -->
### What's New in This Release

#### HIP Enhancements

The ROCm v5.1 release consists of the following HIP enhancements.

##### HIP Installation Guide Updates

The HIP Installation Guide is updated to include installation and building HIP from source on the AMD and NVIDIA platforms.

Refer to the HIP Installation Guide v5.1 for more details.

##### Support for HIP Graph

ROCm v5.1 extends support for HIP Graph.

##### Planned Changes for HIP in Future Releases

###### Separation of hiprtc (libhiprtc) library from hip runtime (amdhip64)

On ROCm/Linux, to maintain backward compatibility, the hipruntime library (amdhip64) will continue to include hiprtc symbols in future releases. The backward compatible support may be discontinued by removing hiprtc symbols from the hipruntime library (amdhip64) in the next major release.

###### hipDeviceProp_t Structure Enhancements

Changes to the hipDeviceProp_t structure in the next major release may result in backward incompatibility.  More details on these changes will be provided in subsequent releases.

#### ROCDebugger Enhancements

##### Multi-language Source Level Debugger

The compiler now generates a source-level variable and function argument debug information.

The accuracy is guaranteed if the compiler options `-g -O0` are used and apply only to HIP.

This enhancement enables ROCDebugger users to interact with the HIP source-level variables and function arguments.

> **Note**
>
> The newly-suggested compiler -g option must be used instead of the previously-suggested `-ggdb` option. Although the effect of these two options is currently equivalent, this is not guaranteed for the future and might get changed by the upstream LLVM community.

##### Machine Interface Lanes Support

ROCDebugger Machine Interface (MI) extends support to lanes. The following enhancements are made:

- Added a new -lane-info command, listing the current thread's lanes.

- The -thread-select command now supports a lane switch to switch to a specific lane of a thread:

  ```sh
  -thread-select -l LANE THREAD
  ```

- The =thread-selected notification gained a lane-id attribute. This enables the frontend to know which lane of the thread was selected.

- The *stopped asynchronous record gained lane-id and hit-lanes attributes.  The former indicates which lane is selected, and the latter indicates which lanes explain the stop.

- MI commands now accept a global --lane option, similar to the global --thread and --frame options.

- MI varobjs are now lane-aware.

For more information, refer to the ROC Debugger User Guide at <https://docs.amd.com>.

##### Enhanced - clone-inferior Command

The clone-inferior command now ensures that the TTY, CMD, ARGS, and AMDGPU PRECISE-MEMORY settings are copied from the original inferior to the new one.  All modifications to the environment variables done using the 'set environment' or 'unset environment' commands are also copied to the new inferior.

#### MIOpen Support for RDNA GPUs

This release includes support for AMD Radeon™ Pro W6800, in addition to other bug fixes and performance improvements as listed below:

- MIOpen now supports RDNA GPUs!! (via MIOpen PRs 973, 780, 764, 740, 739, 677, 660, 653, 493, 498)

- Fixed a correctness issue with ImplicitGemm algorithm

- Updated the performance data for new kernel versions

- Improved MIOpen build time by splitting large kernel header files

- Fixed an issue in reduction kernels for padded tensors

- Various other bug fixes and performance improvements

For more information, see <https://docs.amd.com/bundle/MIOpen_gh-pages/page/releasenotes.html>

#### Checkpoint Restore Support With CRIU

The new Checkpoint Restore in Userspace (CRIU) functionality is implemented to support AMD GPU and ROCm applications.

CRIU is a userspace tool to Checkpoint and Restore an application.

CRIU lacked the support for checkpoint restore applications that used device files such as a GPU. With this ROCm release, CRIU is enhanced with a new plugin to support AMD GPUs, which includes:

- Single and Multi GPU systems (Gfx9)

- Checkpoint / Restore on a different system

- Checkpoint / Restore inside a docker container

- PyTorch

- Tensorflow

- Using CRIU Image Streamer

For more information, refer to <https://github.com/checkpoint-restore/criu/tree/criu-dev/plugins/amdgpu>

> **Note**
>
> The CRIU plugin (amdgpu_plugin) is merged upstream with the CRIU repository. The KFD kernel patches are also available upstream with the amd-staging-drm-next branch (public) and the ROCm 5.1 release branch.

> **Note**
>
> This is a Beta release of the Checkpoint and Restore functionality, and some features are not available in this release.

For more information, refer to the following websites:

- <https://github.com/RadeonOpenCompute/criu/blob/amdgpu_plugin-03252022/Documentation/amdgpu_plugin.txt>

- <https://criu.org/Main_Page>

### Fixed Defects

The following defects are fixed in this release.

#### Driver Fails To Load after Installation

The issue with the driver failing to load after ROCm installation is now fixed.

The driver installs successfully, and the server reboots with working rocminfo and clinfo.

#### ROCDebugger Fixed Defects

##### Breakpoints in GPU kernel code Before Kernel Is Loaded

Previously, setting a breakpoint in device code by line number before the device code was loaded into the program resulted in ROCgdb incorrectly moving the breakpoint to the first following line that contains host code.

Now, the breakpoint is left pending.  When the GPU kernel gets loaded, the breakpoint resolves to a location in the kernel.

##### Registers Invalidated After Write

Previously, the stale just-written value was presented as a current value.

ROCgdb now invalidates the cached values of registers whose content might differ after being written.  For example, registers with read-only bits.

ROCgdb also invalidates all volatile registers when a volatile register is written.  For example, writing VCC invalidates the content of STATUS as STATUS.VCCZ may change.

##### Scheduler-locking and GPU Wavefronts

When scheduler-locking is in effect, new wavefronts created by a resumed thread, CPU, or GPU wavefront, are held in the halt state. For example, the "set scheduler-locking" command.

##### ROCDebugger Fails Before Completion of Kernel Execution

It was possible (although erroneous) for a debugger to load GPU code in memory, send it to the device, start executing a kernel on the device, and dispose of the original code before the kernel had finished execution.  If a breakpoint was hit after this point, the debugger failed with an internal error while trying to access the debug information.

This issue is now fixed by ensuring that the debugger keeps a local copy of the original code and debug information.

### Known Issues

#### Random Memory Access Fault Errors Observed While Running Math Libraries Unit Tests

**Issue:** Random memory access fault issues are observed while running Math libraries unit tests. This issue is encountered in ROCm v5.0, ROCm v5.0.1, and ROCm v5.0.2.

Note, the faults only occur in the SRIOV environment.

**Workaround:** Use SDMA to update the page table. The Guest set up steps are as follows:

```sh
sudo modprobe amdgpu vm_update_mode=0
```

To verify, use

**Guest:**

```sh
cat /sys/module/amdgpu/parameters/vm_update_mode 0
```

Where expectation is 0.

#### CU Masking Causes Application to Freeze

Using CU Masking results in an application freeze or runs exceptionally slowly. This issue is noticed only in the GFX10 suite of products. Note, this issue is observed only in GFX10 suite of products.

This issue is under active investigation at this time.

#### Failed Checkpoint in Docker Containers

A defect with Ubuntu images kernel-5.13-30-generic and kernel-5.13-35-generic with Overlay FS results in incorrect reporting of the mount ID.

This issue with Ubuntu causes CRIU checkpointing to fail in Docker containers.

As a workaround, use an older version of the kernel. For example, Ubuntu 5.11.0-46-generic.

#### Issue with Restoring Workloads Using Cooperative Groups Feature

Workloads that use the cooperative groups function to ensure all waves can be resident at the same time may fail to restore correctly.
This issue is under investigation and will be fixed in a future release.

#### Radeon Pro V620 and W6800 Workstation GPUs

##### No Support for ROCDebugger on SRIOV

ROCDebugger is not supported in the SRIOV environment on any GPU.

This is a known issue and will be fixed in a future release.

#### Random Error Messages in ROCm SMI for SR-IOV

Random error messages are generated by unsupported functions or commands.

This is a known issue and will be fixed in a future release.

### Library Changes in ROCM 5.1.0

| Library | Version |
|---------|---------|
| hipBLAS | 0.49.0 ⇒ [0.50.0](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/hipBLAS/releases/tag/rocm-5.1.0) |
| hipCUB | 2.10.13 ⇒ [2.11.0](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/hipCUB/releases/tag/rocm-5.1.0) |
| hipFFT | 1.0.4 ⇒ [1.0.7](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/hipFFT/releases/tag/rocm-5.1.0) |
| hipSOLVER | 1.2.0 ⇒ [1.3.0](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/hipSOLVER/releases/tag/rocm-5.1.0) |
| hipSPARSE | 2.0.0 ⇒ [2.1.0](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/hipSPARSE/releases/tag/rocm-5.1.0) |
| rccl | 2.10.3 ⇒ [2.11.4](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/rccl/releases/tag/rocm-5.1.0) |
| rocALUTION | 2.0.1 ⇒ [2.0.2](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/rocALUTION/releases/tag/rocm-5.1.0) |
| rocBLAS | 2.42.0 ⇒ [2.43.0](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/rocBLAS/releases/tag/rocm-5.1.0) |
| rocFFT | 1.0.13 ⇒ [1.0.16](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/rocFFT/releases/tag/rocm-5.1.0) |
| rocPRIM | 2.10.12 ⇒ [2.10.13](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/rocPRIM/releases/tag/rocm-5.1.0) |
| rocRAND | 2.10.12 ⇒ [2.10.13](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/rocRAND/releases/tag/rocm-5.1.0) |
| rocSOLVER | 3.16.0 ⇒ [3.17.0](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/rocSOLVER/releases/tag/rocm-5.1.0) |
| rocSPARSE | 2.0.0 ⇒ [2.1.0](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/rocSPARSE/releases/tag/rocm-5.1.0) |
| rocThrust | 2.13.0 ⇒ [2.14.0](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/rocThrust/releases/tag/rocm-5.1.0) |
| Tensile | 4.31.0 ⇒ [4.32.0](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/Tensile/releases/tag/rocm-5.1.0) |

#### hipBLAS 0.50.0

hipBLAS 0.50.0 for ROCm 5.1.0

##### Added

- Added library version and device information to hipblas-test output
- Added --rocsolver-path command line option to choose path to pre-built rocSOLVER, as
  absolute or relative path
- Added --cmake_install command line option to update cmake to minimum version if required
- Added cmake-arg parameter to pass in cmake arguments while building
- Added infrastructure to support readthedocs hipBLAS documentation.

##### Fixed

- Added hipblasVersionMinor define. hipblaseVersionMinor remains defined
  for backwards compatibility.
- Doxygen warnings in hipblas.h header file.

##### Changed

- rocblas-path command line option can be specified as either absolute or relative path
- Help message improvements in install.sh and rmake.py
- Updated googletest dependency from 1.10.0 to 1.11.0

#### hipCUB 2.11.0

hipCUB 2.11.0 for ROCm 5.1.0

##### Added

- Device segmented sort
- Warp merge sort, WarpMask and thread sort from cub 1.15.0 supported in hipCUB
- Device three way partition

##### Changed

- Device_scan and device_segmented_scan: inclusive_scan now uses the input-type as accumulator-type, exclusive_scan uses initial-value-type.
  - This particularly changes behaviour of small-size input types with large-size output types (e.g. short input, int output).
  - And low-res input with high-res output (e.g. float input, double output)
  - Block merge sort no longer supports non power of two blocksizes

#### hipFFT 1.0.7

hipFFT 1.0.7 for ROCm 5.1.0

##### Changed

- Use fft_params struct for accuracy and benchmark clients.

#### hipSOLVER 1.3.0

hipSOLVER 1.3.0 for ROCm 5.1.0

##### Added

- Added functions
  - gels
    - hipsolverSSgels_bufferSize, hipsolverDDgels_bufferSize, hipsolverCCgels_bufferSize, hipsolverZZgels_bufferSize
    - hipsolverSSgels, hipsolverDDgels, hipsolverCCgels, hipsolverZZgels
- Added library version and device information to hipsolver-test output.
- Added compatibility API with hipsolverDn prefix.
- Added compatibility-only functions
  - gesvdj
    - hipsolverDnSgesvdj_bufferSize, hipsolverDnDgesvdj_bufferSize, hipsolverDnCgesvdj_bufferSize, hipsolverDnZgesvdj_bufferSize
    - hipsolverDnSgesvdj, hipsolverDnDgesvdj, hipsolverDnCgesvdj, hipsolverDnZgesvdj
  - gesvdjBatched
    - hipsolverDnSgesvdjBatched_bufferSize, hipsolverDnDgesvdjBatched_bufferSize, hipsolverDnCgesvdjBatched_bufferSize, hipsolverDnZgesvdjBatched_bufferSize
    - hipsolverDnSgesvdjBatched, hipsolverDnDgesvdjBatched, hipsolverDnCgesvdjBatched, hipsolverDnZgesvdjBatched
  - syevj
    - hipsolverDnSsyevj_bufferSize, hipsolverDnDsyevj_bufferSize, hipsolverDnCheevj_bufferSize, hipsolverDnZheevj_bufferSize
    - hipsolverDnSsyevj, hipsolverDnDsyevj, hipsolverDnCheevj, hipsolverDnZheevj
  - syevjBatched
    - hipsolverDnSsyevjBatched_bufferSize, hipsolverDnDsyevjBatched_bufferSize, hipsolverDnCheevjBatched_bufferSize, hipsolverDnZheevjBatched_bufferSize
    - hipsolverDnSsyevjBatched, hipsolverDnDsyevjBatched, hipsolverDnCheevjBatched, hipsolverDnZheevjBatched
  - sygvj
    - hipsolverDnSsygvj_bufferSize, hipsolverDnDsygvj_bufferSize, hipsolverDnChegvj_bufferSize, hipsolverDnZhegvj_bufferSize
    - hipsolverDnSsygvj, hipsolverDnDsygvj, hipsolverDnChegvj, hipsolverDnZhegvj

##### Changed

- The rocSOLVER backend now allows hipsolverXXgels and hipsolverXXgesv to be called in-place when B == X.
- The rocSOLVER backend now allows rwork to be passed as a null pointer to hipsolverXgesvd.

##### Fixed

- bufferSize functions will now return HIPSOLVER_STATUS_NOT_INITIALIZED instead of HIPSOLVER_STATUS_INVALID_VALUE when both handle and lwork are null.
- Fixed rare memory allocation failure in syevd/heevd and sygvd/hegvd caused by improper workspace array allocation outside of rocSOLVER.

#### hipSPARSE 2.1.0

hipSPARSE 2.1.0 for ROCm 5.1.0

##### Added

- Added gtsv_interleaved_batch and gpsv_interleaved_batch routines
- Add SpGEMM_reuse

##### Changed

- Changed BUILD_CUDA with USE_CUDA in install script and cmake files
- Update googletest to 11.1

##### Improved

- Fixed a bug in SpMM Alg versioning

##### Known Issues

- none

#### rccl 2.11.4

RCCL 2.11.4 for ROCm 5.1.0

##### Added

- Compatibility with NCCL 2.11.4

##### Known Issues

- Managed memory is not currently supported for clique-based kernels

#### rocALUTION 2.0.2

rocALUTION 2.0.2 for ROCm 5.1.0

##### Added

- Added out-of-place matrix transpose functionality
- Added LocalVector&lt;bool&gt;

#### rocBLAS 2.43.0

rocBLAS 2.43.0 for ROCm 5.1.0

##### Added

- Option to install script for number of jobs to use for rocBLAS and Tensile compilation (-j, --jobs)
- Option to install script to build clients without using any Fortran (--clients_no_fortran)
- rocblas_client_initialize function, to perform rocBLAS initialize for clients(benchmark/test) and report the execution time.
- Added tests for output of reduction functions when given bad input
- Added user specified initialization (rand_int/trig_float/hpl) for initializing matrices and vectors in rocblas-bench

##### Optimizations

- Improved performance of trsm with side == left and n == 1
- Improved perforamnce of trsm with side == left and m &lt;= 32 along with side == right and n &lt;= 32

##### Changed

- For syrkx and trmm internal API use rocblas_stride datatype for offset
- For non-batched and batched gemm_ex functions if the C matrix pointer equals the D matrix pointer (aliased) their respective type and leading dimension arguments must now match
- Test client dependencies updated to GTest 1.11
- non-global false positives reported by cppcheck from file based suppression to inline suppression. File based suppression will only be used for global false positives.
- Help menu messages in install.sh
- For ger function, typecast the &#39;lda&#39;(offset) datatype to size_t during offset calculation to avoid overflow and remove duplicate template functions.
- Modified default initialization from rand_int to hpl for initializing matrices and vectors in rocblas-bench

##### Fixed

- For function trmv (non-transposed cases) avoid overflow in offset calculation
- Fixed cppcheck errors/warnings
- Fixed doxygen warnings

#### rocFFT 1.0.16

rocFFT 1.0.16 for ROCm 5.1.0

##### Changed

- Supported unaligned tile dimension for SBRC_2D kernels.
- Improved (more RAII) test and benchmark infrastructure.
- Enabled runtime compilation of length-2304 FFT kernel during plan creation.

##### Optimizations

- Optimized more large 1D cases by using L1D_CC plan.
- Optimized 3D 200^3 C2R case.
- Optimized 1D 2^30 double precision on MI200.

##### Fixed

- Fixed correctness of some R2C transforms with unusual strides.

##### Removed

- The hipFFT API (header) has been removed from after a long deprecation period.  Please use the [hipFFT](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/hipFFT) package/repository to obtain the hipFFT API.

#### rocPRIM 2.10.13

rocPRIM 2.10.13 for ROCm 5.1.0

##### Fixed

- Fixed radix sort int64_t bug introduced in [2.10.11]

##### Added

- Future value
- Added device partition_three_way to partition input to three output iterators based on two predicates

##### Changed

- The reduce/scan algorithm precision issues in the tests has been resolved for half types.

##### Known Issues

- device_segmented_radix_sort unit test failing for HIP on Windows

#### rocRAND 2.10.13

rocRAND 2.10.13 for ROCm 5.1.0

##### Added

- Generating a random sequence different sizes now produces the same sequence without gaps
  indepent of how many values are generated per call.
  - Only in the case of XORWOW, MRG32K3A, PHILOX4X32_10, SOBOL32 and SOBOL64
  - This only holds true if the size in each call is a divisor of the distributions
    `output_width` due to performance
  - Similarly the output pointer has to be aligned to `output_width * sizeof(output_type)`

##### Changed

- [hipRAND](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/hipRAND.git) split into a separate package
- Header file installation location changed to match other libraries.
  - Using the `rocrand.h` header file should now use `#include &lt;rocrand/rocrand.h&gt;`, rather than `#include &lt;rocrand/rocrand.h&gt;`
- rocRAND still includes hipRAND using a submodule
  - The rocRAND package also sets the provides field with hipRAND, so projects which require hipRAND can begin to specify it.

##### Fixed

- Fix offset behaviour for XORWOW, MRG32K3A and PHILOX4X32_10 generator, setting offset now
  correctly generates the same sequence starting from the offset.
  - Only uniform int and float will work as these can be generated with a single call to the generator

##### Known Issues

- kernel_xorwow unit test is failing for certain GPU architectures.

#### rocSOLVER 3.17.0

rocSOLVER 3.17.0 for ROCm 5.1.0

##### Optimized

- Optimized non-pivoting and batch cases of the LU factorization

##### Fixed

- Fixed missing synchronization in SYTRF with `rocblas_fill_lower` that could potentially
  result in incorrect pivot values.
- Fixed multi-level logging output to file with the `ROCSOLVER_LOG_PATH`,
  `ROCSOLVER_LOG_TRACE_PATH`, `ROCSOLVER_LOG_BENCH_PATH` and `ROCSOLVER_LOG_PROFILE_PATH`
  environment variables.
- Fixed performance regression in the batched LU factorization of tiny matrices

#### rocSPARSE 2.1.0

rocSPARSE 2.1.0 for ROCm 5.1.0

##### Added

- gtsv_interleaved_batch 
- gpsv_interleaved_batch
- SpGEMM_reuse
- Allow copying of mat info struct

##### Improved

- Optimization for SDDMM
- Allow unsorted matrices in csrgemm multipass algorithm

##### Known Issues

- none

#### rocThrust 2.14.0

rocThrust 2.14.0 for ROCm 5.1.0

##### Added

- Updated to match upstream Thrust 1.15.0

##### Known Issues

- async_copy, partition, and stable_sort_by_key unit tests are failing on HIP on Windows.

#### Tensile 4.32.0

Tensile 4.32.0 for ROCm 5.1.0

##### Added

- Better control of parallelism to control memory usage
- Support for multiprocessing on Windows for TensileCreateLibrary
- New JSD metric and metric selection functionality
- Initial changes to support two-tier solution selection

##### Optimized

- Optimized runtime of TensileCreateLibraries by reducing max RAM usage
- StoreCInUnroll additional optimizations plus adaptive K support
- DGEMM NN optimizations with PrefetchGlobalRead(PGR)=2 support

##### Changed

- Update Googletest to 1.11.0

##### Removed

- Remove no longer supported benchmarking steps

-------------------

## ROCm 5.0.2
<!-- markdownlint-disable first-line-h1 -->
### Fixed Defects

The following defects are fixed in the ROCm v5.0.2 release.

#### Issue with hostcall Facility in HIP Runtime

In ROCm v5.0, when using the “assert()” call in a HIP kernel, the compiler may sometimes fail to emit kernel metadata related to the hostcall facility, which results in incomplete initialization of the hostcall facility in the HIP runtime. This can cause the HIP kernel to crash when it attempts to execute the “assert()” call.

The root cause was an incorrect check in the compiler to determine whether the hostcall facility is required by the kernel. This is fixed in the ROCm v5.0.2 release.

The resolution includes a compiler change, which emits the required metadata by default, unless the compiler can prove that the hostcall facility is not required by the kernel. This ensures that the “assert()” call never fails.

Note:
This fix may lead to breakage in some OpenMP offload use cases, which use print inside a target region and result in an abort in device code. The issue will be fixed in a future release.
Compatibility Matrix Updates to ROCm Deep Learning Guide

The compatibility matrix in the AMD Deep Learning Guide is updated for ROCm v5.0.2.

### Library Changes in ROCM 5.0.2

| Library | Version |
|---------|---------|
| hipBLAS | [0.49.0](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/hipBLAS/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.2) |
| hipCUB | [2.10.13](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/hipCUB/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.2) |
| hipFFT | [1.0.4](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/hipFFT/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.2) |
| hipSOLVER | [1.2.0](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/hipSOLVER/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.2) |
| hipSPARSE | [2.0.0](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/hipSPARSE/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.2) |
| rccl | [2.10.3](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/rccl/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.2) |
| rocALUTION | [2.0.1](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/rocALUTION/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.2) |
| rocBLAS | [2.42.0](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/rocBLAS/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.2) |
| rocFFT | [1.0.13](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/rocFFT/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.2) |
| rocPRIM | [2.10.12](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/rocPRIM/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.2) |
| rocRAND | [2.10.12](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/rocRAND/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.2) |
| rocSOLVER | [3.16.0](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/rocSOLVER/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.2) |
| rocSPARSE | [2.0.0](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/rocSPARSE/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.2) |
| rocThrust | [2.13.0](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/rocThrust/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.2) |
| Tensile | [4.31.0](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/Tensile/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.2) |

-------------------

## ROCm 5.0.1
<!-- markdownlint-disable first-line-h1 -->
### Deprecations and Warnings

#### Refactor of HIPCC/HIPCONFIG

In prior ROCm releases, by default, the hipcc/hipconfig Perl scripts were used to identify and set target compiler options, target platform, compiler, and runtime appropriately.

In ROCm v5.0.1, hipcc.bin and hipconfig.bin have been added as the compiled binary implementations of the hipcc and hipconfig. These new binaries are currently a work-in-progress, considered, and marked as experimental. ROCm plans to fully transition to hipcc.bin and hipconfig.bin in the a future ROCm release. The existing hipcc and hipconfig Perl scripts are renamed to hipcc.pl and hipconfig.pl respectively. New top-level hipcc and hipconfig Perl scripts are created, which can switch between the Perl script or the compiled binary based on the environment variable HIPCC_USE_PERL_SCRIPT.

In ROCm 5.0.1, by default, this environment variable is set to use hipcc and hipconfig through the Perl scripts.

Subsequently, Perl scripts will no longer be available in ROCm in a future release.

### Library Changes in ROCM 5.0.1

| Library | Version |
|---------|---------|
| hipBLAS | [0.49.0](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/hipBLAS/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.1) |
| hipCUB | [2.10.13](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/hipCUB/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.1) |
| hipFFT | [1.0.4](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/hipFFT/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.1) |
| hipSOLVER | [1.2.0](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/hipSOLVER/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.1) |
| hipSPARSE | [2.0.0](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/hipSPARSE/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.1) |
| rccl | [2.10.3](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/rccl/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.1) |
| rocALUTION | [2.0.1](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/rocALUTION/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.1) |
| rocBLAS | [2.42.0](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/rocBLAS/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.1) |
| rocFFT | [1.0.13](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/rocFFT/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.1) |
| rocPRIM | [2.10.12](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/rocPRIM/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.1) |
| rocRAND | [2.10.12](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/rocRAND/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.1) |
| rocSOLVER | [3.16.0](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/rocSOLVER/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.1) |
| rocSPARSE | [2.0.0](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/rocSPARSE/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.1) |
| rocThrust | [2.13.0](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/rocThrust/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.1) |
| Tensile | [4.31.0](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/Tensile/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.1) |

-------------------

## ROCm 5.0.0
<!-- markdownlint-disable first-line-h1 -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable no-blanks-blockquote -->
### What's New in This Release

#### HIP Enhancements

The ROCm v5.0 release consists of the following HIP enhancements.

##### HIP Installation Guide Updates

The HIP Installation Guide is updated to include building HIP from source on the NVIDIA platform.

Refer to the HIP Installation Guide v5.0 for more details.

##### Managed Memory Allocation

Managed memory, including the `__managed__` keyword, is now supported in the HIP combined host/device compilation. Through unified memory allocation, managed memory allows data to be shared and accessible to both the CPU and GPU using a single pointer. The allocation is managed by the AMD GPU driver using the Linux Heterogeneous Memory Management (HMM) mechanism. The user can call managed memory API hipMallocManaged to allocate a large chunk of HMM memory, execute kernels on a device, and fetch data between the host and device as needed.

> **Note**
>
> In a HIP application,  it is recommended to do a capability check before calling the managed memory APIs. For example,
>
> ```cpp
> int managed_memory = 0;
> HIPCHECK(hipDeviceGetAttribute(&managed_memory,
>   hipDeviceAttributeManagedMemory,p_gpuDevice));
> if (!managed_memory ) {
>   printf ("info: managed memory access not supported on the device %d\n Skipped\n", p_gpuDevice);
> }
> else {
>   HIPCHECK(hipSetDevice(p_gpuDevice));
>   HIPCHECK(hipMallocManaged(&Hmm, N * sizeof(T)));
> . . .
> }
> ```

> **Note**
>
> The managed memory capability check may not be necessary; however, if HMM is not supported, managed malloc will fall back to using system memory. Other managed memory API calls will, then, have

Refer to the HIP API documentation for more details on managed memory APIs.

For the application, see

<https://github.com/ROCm-Developer-Tools/HIP/blob/rocm-4.5.x/tests/src/runtimeApi/memory/hipMallocManaged.cpp>

#### New Environment Variable

The following new environment variable is added in this release:

| Environment Variable | Value                 | Description |
|----------------------|-----------------------|-------------|
| HSA_COOP_CU_COUNT    | 0 or 1 (default is 0) | Some processors support more CUs than can reliably be used in a cooperative dispatch. Setting the environment variable HSA_COOP_CU_COUNT to 1 will cause ROCr to return the correct CU count for cooperative groups through the HSA_AMD_AGENT_INFO_COOPERATIVE_COMPUTE_UNIT_COUNT attribute of hsa_agent_get_info(). Setting HSA_COOP_CU_COUNT to other values, or leaving it unset, will cause ROCr to return the same CU count for the attributes HSA_AMD_AGENT_INFO_COOPERATIVE_COMPUTE_UNIT_COUNT and HSA_AMD_AGENT_INFO_COMPUTE_UNIT_COUNT. Future ROCm releases will make HSA_COOP_CU_COUNT=1 the default. |

### Breaking Changes

#### Runtime Breaking Change

Re-ordering of the enumerated type in hip_runtime_api.h to better match NV.  See below for the difference in enumerated types.

ROCm software will be affected if any of the defined enums listed below are used in the code.  Applications built with ROCm v5.0 enumerated types will work with a ROCm 4.5.2 driver. However, an undefined behavior error will occur with a ROCm v4.5.2 application that uses these enumerated types with a ROCm 5.0 runtime.

```diff
typedef enum hipDeviceAttribute_t {
-    hipDeviceAttributeMaxThreadsPerBlock,       ///< Maximum number of threads per block.
-    hipDeviceAttributeMaxBlockDimX,             ///< Maximum x-dimension of a block.
-    hipDeviceAttributeMaxBlockDimY,             ///< Maximum y-dimension of a block.
-    hipDeviceAttributeMaxBlockDimZ,             ///< Maximum z-dimension of a block.
-    hipDeviceAttributeMaxGridDimX,              ///< Maximum x-dimension of a grid.
-    hipDeviceAttributeMaxGridDimY,              ///< Maximum y-dimension of a grid.
-    hipDeviceAttributeMaxGridDimZ,              ///< Maximum z-dimension of a grid.
-    hipDeviceAttributeMaxSharedMemoryPerBlock,  ///< Maximum shared memory available per block in
-                                                ///< bytes.
-    hipDeviceAttributeTotalConstantMemory,      ///< Constant memory size in bytes.
-    hipDeviceAttributeWarpSize,                 ///< Warp size in threads.
-    hipDeviceAttributeMaxRegistersPerBlock,  ///< Maximum number of 32-bit registers available to a
-                                             ///< thread block. This number is shared by all thread
-                                             ///< blocks simultaneously resident on a
-                                             ///< multiprocessor.
-    hipDeviceAttributeClockRate,             ///< Peak clock frequency in kilohertz.
-    hipDeviceAttributeMemoryClockRate,       ///< Peak memory clock frequency in kilohertz.
-    hipDeviceAttributeMemoryBusWidth,        ///< Global memory bus width in bits.
-    hipDeviceAttributeMultiprocessorCount,   ///< Number of multiprocessors on the device.
-    hipDeviceAttributeComputeMode,           ///< Compute mode that device is currently in.
-    hipDeviceAttributeL2CacheSize,  ///< Size of L2 cache in bytes. 0 if the device doesn't have L2
-                                    ///< cache.
-    hipDeviceAttributeMaxThreadsPerMultiProcessor,  ///< Maximum resident threads per
-                                                    ///< multiprocessor.
-    hipDeviceAttributeComputeCapabilityMajor,       ///< Major compute capability version number.
-    hipDeviceAttributeComputeCapabilityMinor,       ///< Minor compute capability version number.
-    hipDeviceAttributeConcurrentKernels,  ///< Device can possibly execute multiple kernels
-                                          ///< concurrently.
-    hipDeviceAttributePciBusId,           ///< PCI Bus ID.
-    hipDeviceAttributePciDeviceId,        ///< PCI Device ID.
-    hipDeviceAttributeMaxSharedMemoryPerMultiprocessor,  ///< Maximum Shared Memory Per
-                                                         ///< Multiprocessor.
-    hipDeviceAttributeIsMultiGpuBoard,                   ///< Multiple GPU devices.
-    hipDeviceAttributeIntegrated,                        ///< iGPU
-    hipDeviceAttributeCooperativeLaunch,                 ///< Support cooperative launch
-    hipDeviceAttributeCooperativeMultiDeviceLaunch,      ///< Support cooperative launch on multiple devices
-    hipDeviceAttributeMaxTexture1DWidth,    ///< Maximum number of elements in 1D images
-    hipDeviceAttributeMaxTexture2DWidth,    ///< Maximum dimension width of 2D images in image elements
-    hipDeviceAttributeMaxTexture2DHeight,   ///< Maximum dimension height of 2D images in image elements
-    hipDeviceAttributeMaxTexture3DWidth,    ///< Maximum dimension width of 3D images in image elements
-    hipDeviceAttributeMaxTexture3DHeight,   ///< Maximum dimensions height of 3D images in image elements
-    hipDeviceAttributeMaxTexture3DDepth,    ///< Maximum dimensions depth of 3D images in image elements
+    hipDeviceAttributeCudaCompatibleBegin = 0,

-    hipDeviceAttributeHdpMemFlushCntl,      ///< Address of the HDP_MEM_COHERENCY_FLUSH_CNTL register
-    hipDeviceAttributeHdpRegFlushCntl,      ///< Address of the HDP_REG_COHERENCY_FLUSH_CNTL register
+    hipDeviceAttributeEccEnabled = hipDeviceAttributeCudaCompatibleBegin, ///< Whether ECC support is enabled.
+    hipDeviceAttributeAccessPolicyMaxWindowSize,        ///< Cuda only. The maximum size of the window policy in bytes.
+    hipDeviceAttributeAsyncEngineCount,                 ///< Cuda only. Asynchronous engines number.
+    hipDeviceAttributeCanMapHostMemory,                 ///< Whether host memory can be mapped into device address space
+    hipDeviceAttributeCanUseHostPointerForRegisteredMem,///< Cuda only. Device can access host registered memory
+                                                        ///< at the same virtual address as the CPU
+    hipDeviceAttributeClockRate,                        ///< Peak clock frequency in kilohertz.
+    hipDeviceAttributeComputeMode,                      ///< Compute mode that device is currently in.
+    hipDeviceAttributeComputePreemptionSupported,       ///< Cuda only. Device supports Compute Preemption.
+    hipDeviceAttributeConcurrentKernels,                ///< Device can possibly execute multiple kernels concurrently.
+    hipDeviceAttributeConcurrentManagedAccess,          ///< Device can coherently access managed memory concurrently with the CPU
+    hipDeviceAttributeCooperativeLaunch,                ///< Support cooperative launch
+    hipDeviceAttributeCooperativeMultiDeviceLaunch,     ///< Support cooperative launch on multiple devices
+    hipDeviceAttributeDeviceOverlap,                    ///< Cuda only. Device can concurrently copy memory and execute a kernel.
+                                                        ///< Deprecated. Use instead asyncEngineCount.
+    hipDeviceAttributeDirectManagedMemAccessFromHost,   ///< Host can directly access managed memory on
+                                                        ///< the device without migration
+    hipDeviceAttributeGlobalL1CacheSupported,           ///< Cuda only. Device supports caching globals in L1
+    hipDeviceAttributeHostNativeAtomicSupported,        ///< Cuda only. Link between the device and the host supports native atomic operations
+    hipDeviceAttributeIntegrated,                       ///< Device is integrated GPU
+    hipDeviceAttributeIsMultiGpuBoard,                  ///< Multiple GPU devices.
+    hipDeviceAttributeKernelExecTimeout,                ///< Run time limit for kernels executed on the device
+    hipDeviceAttributeL2CacheSize,                      ///< Size of L2 cache in bytes. 0 if the device doesn't have L2 cache.
+    hipDeviceAttributeLocalL1CacheSupported,            ///< caching locals in L1 is supported
+    hipDeviceAttributeLuid,                             ///< Cuda only. 8-byte locally unique identifier in 8 bytes. Undefined on TCC and non-Windows platforms
+    hipDeviceAttributeLuidDeviceNodeMask,               ///< Cuda only. Luid device node mask. Undefined on TCC and non-Windows platforms
+    hipDeviceAttributeComputeCapabilityMajor,           ///< Major compute capability version number.
+    hipDeviceAttributeManagedMemory,                    ///< Device supports allocating managed memory on this system
+    hipDeviceAttributeMaxBlocksPerMultiProcessor,       ///< Cuda only. Max block size per multiprocessor
+    hipDeviceAttributeMaxBlockDimX,                     ///< Max block size in width.
+    hipDeviceAttributeMaxBlockDimY,                     ///< Max block size in height.
+    hipDeviceAttributeMaxBlockDimZ,                     ///< Max block size in depth.
+    hipDeviceAttributeMaxGridDimX,                      ///< Max grid size  in width.
+    hipDeviceAttributeMaxGridDimY,                      ///< Max grid size  in height.
+    hipDeviceAttributeMaxGridDimZ,                      ///< Max grid size  in depth.
+    hipDeviceAttributeMaxSurface1D,                     ///< Maximum size of 1D surface.
+    hipDeviceAttributeMaxSurface1DLayered,              ///< Cuda only. Maximum dimensions of 1D layered surface.
+    hipDeviceAttributeMaxSurface2D,                     ///< Maximum dimension (width, height) of 2D surface.
+    hipDeviceAttributeMaxSurface2DLayered,              ///< Cuda only. Maximum dimensions of 2D layered surface.
+    hipDeviceAttributeMaxSurface3D,                     ///< Maximum dimension (width, height, depth) of 3D surface.
+    hipDeviceAttributeMaxSurfaceCubemap,                ///< Cuda only. Maximum dimensions of Cubemap surface.
+    hipDeviceAttributeMaxSurfaceCubemapLayered,         ///< Cuda only. Maximum dimension of Cubemap layered surface.
+    hipDeviceAttributeMaxTexture1DWidth,                ///< Maximum size of 1D texture.
+    hipDeviceAttributeMaxTexture1DLayered,              ///< Cuda only. Maximum dimensions of 1D layered texture.
+    hipDeviceAttributeMaxTexture1DLinear,               ///< Maximum number of elements allocatable in a 1D linear texture.
+                                                        ///< Use cudaDeviceGetTexture1DLinearMaxWidth() instead on Cuda.
+    hipDeviceAttributeMaxTexture1DMipmap,               ///< Cuda only. Maximum size of 1D mipmapped texture.
+    hipDeviceAttributeMaxTexture2DWidth,                ///< Maximum dimension width of 2D texture.
+    hipDeviceAttributeMaxTexture2DHeight,               ///< Maximum dimension hight of 2D texture.
+    hipDeviceAttributeMaxTexture2DGather,               ///< Cuda only. Maximum dimensions of 2D texture if gather operations  performed.
+    hipDeviceAttributeMaxTexture2DLayered,              ///< Cuda only. Maximum dimensions of 2D layered texture.
+    hipDeviceAttributeMaxTexture2DLinear,               ///< Cuda only. Maximum dimensions (width, height, pitch) of 2D textures bound to pitched memory.
+    hipDeviceAttributeMaxTexture2DMipmap,               ///< Cuda only. Maximum dimensions of 2D mipmapped texture.
+    hipDeviceAttributeMaxTexture3DWidth,                ///< Maximum dimension width of 3D texture.
+    hipDeviceAttributeMaxTexture3DHeight,               ///< Maximum dimension height of 3D texture.
+    hipDeviceAttributeMaxTexture3DDepth,                ///< Maximum dimension depth of 3D texture.
+    hipDeviceAttributeMaxTexture3DAlt,                  ///< Cuda only. Maximum dimensions of alternate 3D texture.
+    hipDeviceAttributeMaxTextureCubemap,                ///< Cuda only. Maximum dimensions of Cubemap texture
+    hipDeviceAttributeMaxTextureCubemapLayered,         ///< Cuda only. Maximum dimensions of Cubemap layered texture.
+    hipDeviceAttributeMaxThreadsDim,                    ///< Maximum dimension of a block
+    hipDeviceAttributeMaxThreadsPerBlock,               ///< Maximum number of threads per block.
+    hipDeviceAttributeMaxThreadsPerMultiProcessor,      ///< Maximum resident threads per multiprocessor.
+    hipDeviceAttributeMaxPitch,                         ///< Maximum pitch in bytes allowed by memory copies
+    hipDeviceAttributeMemoryBusWidth,                   ///< Global memory bus width in bits.
+    hipDeviceAttributeMemoryClockRate,                  ///< Peak memory clock frequency in kilohertz.
+    hipDeviceAttributeComputeCapabilityMinor,           ///< Minor compute capability version number.
+    hipDeviceAttributeMultiGpuBoardGroupID,             ///< Cuda only. Unique ID of device group on the same multi-GPU board
+    hipDeviceAttributeMultiprocessorCount,              ///< Number of multiprocessors on the device.
+    hipDeviceAttributeName,                             ///< Device name.
+    hipDeviceAttributePageableMemoryAccess,             ///< Device supports coherently accessing pageable memory
+                                                        ///< without calling hipHostRegister on it
+    hipDeviceAttributePageableMemoryAccessUsesHostPageTables, ///< Device accesses pageable memory via the host's page tables
+    hipDeviceAttributePciBusId,                         ///< PCI Bus ID.
+    hipDeviceAttributePciDeviceId,                      ///< PCI Device ID.
+    hipDeviceAttributePciDomainID,                      ///< PCI Domain ID.
+    hipDeviceAttributePersistingL2CacheMaxSize,         ///< Cuda11 only. Maximum l2 persisting lines capacity in bytes
+    hipDeviceAttributeMaxRegistersPerBlock,             ///< 32-bit registers available to a thread block. This number is shared
+                                                        ///< by all thread blocks simultaneously resident on a multiprocessor.
+    hipDeviceAttributeMaxRegistersPerMultiprocessor,    ///< 32-bit registers available per block.
+    hipDeviceAttributeReservedSharedMemPerBlock,        ///< Cuda11 only. Shared memory reserved by CUDA driver per block.
+    hipDeviceAttributeMaxSharedMemoryPerBlock,          ///< Maximum shared memory available per block in bytes.
+    hipDeviceAttributeSharedMemPerBlockOptin,           ///< Cuda only. Maximum shared memory per block usable by special opt in.
+    hipDeviceAttributeSharedMemPerMultiprocessor,       ///< Cuda only. Shared memory available per multiprocessor.
+    hipDeviceAttributeSingleToDoublePrecisionPerfRatio, ///< Cuda only. Performance ratio of single precision to double precision.
+    hipDeviceAttributeStreamPrioritiesSupported,        ///< Cuda only. Whether to support stream priorities.
+    hipDeviceAttributeSurfaceAlignment,                 ///< Cuda only. Alignment requirement for surfaces
+    hipDeviceAttributeTccDriver,                        ///< Cuda only. Whether device is a Tesla device using TCC driver
+    hipDeviceAttributeTextureAlignment,                 ///< Alignment requirement for textures
+    hipDeviceAttributeTexturePitchAlignment,            ///< Pitch alignment requirement for 2D texture references bound to pitched memory;
+    hipDeviceAttributeTotalConstantMemory,              ///< Constant memory size in bytes.
+    hipDeviceAttributeTotalGlobalMem,                   ///< Global memory available on devicice.
+    hipDeviceAttributeUnifiedAddressing,                ///< Cuda only. An unified address space shared with the host.
+    hipDeviceAttributeUuid,                             ///< Cuda only. Unique ID in 16 byte.
+    hipDeviceAttributeWarpSize,                         ///< Warp size in threads.

-    hipDeviceAttributeMaxPitch,             ///< Maximum pitch in bytes allowed by memory copies
-    hipDeviceAttributeTextureAlignment,     ///<Alignment requirement for textures
-    hipDeviceAttributeTexturePitchAlignment, ///<Pitch alignment requirement for 2D texture references bound to pitched memory;
-    hipDeviceAttributeKernelExecTimeout,    ///<Run time limit for kernels executed on the device
-    hipDeviceAttributeCanMapHostMemory,     ///<Device can map host memory into device address space
-    hipDeviceAttributeEccEnabled,           ///<Device has ECC support enabled
+    hipDeviceAttributeCudaCompatibleEnd = 9999,
+    hipDeviceAttributeAmdSpecificBegin = 10000,

-    hipDeviceAttributeCooperativeMultiDeviceUnmatchedFunc,        ///< Supports cooperative launch on multiple
-                                                                  ///devices with unmatched functions
-    hipDeviceAttributeCooperativeMultiDeviceUnmatchedGridDim,     ///< Supports cooperative launch on multiple
-                                                                  ///devices with unmatched grid dimensions
-    hipDeviceAttributeCooperativeMultiDeviceUnmatchedBlockDim,    ///< Supports cooperative launch on multiple
-                                                                  ///devices with unmatched block dimensions
-    hipDeviceAttributeCooperativeMultiDeviceUnmatchedSharedMem,   ///< Supports cooperative launch on multiple
-                                                                  ///devices with unmatched shared memories
-    hipDeviceAttributeAsicRevision,         ///< Revision of the GPU in this device
-    hipDeviceAttributeManagedMemory,        ///< Device supports allocating managed memory on this system
-    hipDeviceAttributeDirectManagedMemAccessFromHost, ///< Host can directly access managed memory on
-                                                      /// the device without migration
-    hipDeviceAttributeConcurrentManagedAccess,  ///< Device can coherently access managed memory
-                                                /// concurrently with the CPU
-    hipDeviceAttributePageableMemoryAccess,     ///< Device supports coherently accessing pageable memory
-                                                /// without calling hipHostRegister on it
-    hipDeviceAttributePageableMemoryAccessUsesHostPageTables, ///< Device accesses pageable memory via
-                                                              /// the host's page tables
-    hipDeviceAttributeCanUseStreamWaitValue ///< '1' if Device supports hipStreamWaitValue32() and
-                                            ///< hipStreamWaitValue64() , '0' otherwise.
+    hipDeviceAttributeClockInstructionRate = hipDeviceAttributeAmdSpecificBegin,  ///< Frequency in khz of the timer used by the device-side "clock*"
+    hipDeviceAttributeArch,                                     ///< Device architecture
+    hipDeviceAttributeMaxSharedMemoryPerMultiprocessor,         ///< Maximum Shared Memory PerMultiprocessor.
+    hipDeviceAttributeGcnArch,                                  ///< Device gcn architecture
+    hipDeviceAttributeGcnArchName,                              ///< Device gcnArch name in 256 bytes
+    hipDeviceAttributeHdpMemFlushCntl,                          ///< Address of the HDP_MEM_COHERENCY_FLUSH_CNTL register
+    hipDeviceAttributeHdpRegFlushCntl,                          ///< Address of the HDP_REG_COHERENCY_FLUSH_CNTL register
+    hipDeviceAttributeCooperativeMultiDeviceUnmatchedFunc,      ///< Supports cooperative launch on multiple
+                                                                ///< devices with unmatched functions
+    hipDeviceAttributeCooperativeMultiDeviceUnmatchedGridDim,   ///< Supports cooperative launch on multiple
+                                                                ///< devices with unmatched grid dimensions
+    hipDeviceAttributeCooperativeMultiDeviceUnmatchedBlockDim,  ///< Supports cooperative launch on multiple
+                                                                ///< devices with unmatched block dimensions
+    hipDeviceAttributeCooperativeMultiDeviceUnmatchedSharedMem, ///< Supports cooperative launch on multiple
+                                                                ///< devices with unmatched shared memories
+    hipDeviceAttributeIsLargeBar,                               ///< Whether it is LargeBar
+    hipDeviceAttributeAsicRevision,                             ///< Revision of the GPU in this device
+    hipDeviceAttributeCanUseStreamWaitValue,                    ///< '1' if Device supports hipStreamWaitValue32() and
+                                                                ///< hipStreamWaitValue64() , '0' otherwise.

+    hipDeviceAttributeAmdSpecificEnd = 19999,
+    hipDeviceAttributeVendorSpecificBegin = 20000,
+    // Extended attributes for vendors
 } hipDeviceAttribute_t;

 enum hipComputeMode {
```

### Known Issues

#### Incorrect dGPU Behavior When Using AMDVBFlash Tool

The AMDVBFlash tool, used for flashing the VBIOS image to dGPU, does not communicate with the ROM Controller specifically when the driver is present. This is because the driver, as part of its runtime power management feature, puts the dGPU to a sleep state.

As a workaround, users can run amdgpu.runpm=0, which temporarily disables the runtime power management feature from the driver and dynamically changes some power control-related sysfs files.

#### Issue with START Timestamp in ROCProfiler

Users may encounter an issue with the enabled timestamp functionality for monitoring one or multiple counters. ROCProfiler outputs the following four timestamps for each kernel:

- Dispatch

- Start

- End

- Complete

##### Issue

This defect is related to the Start timestamp functionality, which incorrectly shows an earlier time than the Dispatch timestamp.

To reproduce the issue,

1. Enable timing using the --timestamp on flag.

2. Use the -i option with the input filename that contains the name of the counter(s) to monitor.

3. Run the program.

4. Check the output result file.

##### Current behavior

BeginNS is lower than DispatchNS, which is incorrect.

##### Expected behavior

The correct order is:

Dispatch < Start < End < Complete

Users cannot use ROCProfiler to measure the time spent on each kernel because of the incorrect timestamp with counter collection enabled.

##### Recommended Workaround

Users are recommended to collect kernel execution timestamps without monitoring counters, as follows:

1. ​Enable timing using the --timestamp on flag, and run the application.

2. Rerun the application using the -i option with the input filename that contains the name of the counter(s) to monitor, and save this to a different output file using the -o flag.

3. Check the output result file from step 1.

4. The order of timestamps correctly displays as:
  DispathNS < BeginNS < EndNS < CompleteNS

5. Users can find the values of the collected counters in the output file generated in step 2.

#### Radeon Pro V620 and W6800 Workstation GPUs

##### No Support for SMI and ROCDebugger on SRIOV

System Management Interface (SMI) and ROCDebugger are not supported in the SRIOV environment on any GPU. For more information, refer to the Systems Management Interface documentation.

### Deprecations and Warnings

#### ROCm Libraries Changes – Deprecations and Deprecation Removal

- The hipFFT.h header is now provided only by the hipFFT package.  Up to ROCm 5.0, users would get hipFFT.h in the rocFFT package too.

- The GlobalPairwiseAMG class is now entirely removed, users should use the PairwiseAMG class instead.

- The rocsparse_spmm signature in 5.0 was changed to match that of rocsparse_spmm_ex.  In 5.0, rocsparse_spmm_ex is still present, but deprecated. Signature diff for rocsparse_spmm
  rocsparse_spmm in 5.0

  ```h
  rocsparse_status rocsparse_spmm(rocsparse_handle            handle,
                                  rocsparse_operation         trans_A,
                                  rocsparse_operation         trans_B,
                                  const void*                 alpha,
                                  const rocsparse_spmat_descr mat_A,
                                  const rocsparse_dnmat_descr mat_B,
                                  const void*                 beta,
                                  const rocsparse_dnmat_descr mat_C,
                                  rocsparse_datatype          compute_type,
                                  rocsparse_spmm_alg          alg,
                                  rocsparse_spmm_stage        stage,
                                  size_t*                     buffer_size,
                                  void*                       temp_buffer);
  ```

  rocSPARSE_spmm in 4.0

  ```h
  rocsparse_status rocsparse_spmm(rocsparse_handle            handle,
                                  rocsparse_operation         trans_A,
                                  rocsparse_operation         trans_B,
                                  const void*                 alpha,
                                  const rocsparse_spmat_descr mat_A,
                                  const rocsparse_dnmat_descr mat_B,
                                  const void*                 beta,
                                  const rocsparse_dnmat_descr mat_C,
                                  rocsparse_datatype          compute_type,
                                  rocsparse_spmm_alg          alg,
                                  size_t*                     buffer_size,
                                  void*                       temp_buffer);
  ```

#### HIP API Deprecations and Warnings

##### Warning - Arithmetic Operators of HIP Complex and Vector Types

In this release, arithmetic operators of HIP complex and vector types are deprecated.

- As alternatives to arithmetic operators of HIP complex types, users can use arithmetic operators of `std::complex` types.

- As alternatives to arithmetic operators of HIP vector types, users can use the operators of the native clang vector type associated with the data member of HIP vector types.

During the deprecation, two macros `_HIP_ENABLE_COMPLEX_OPERATORS` and `_HIP_ENABLE_VECTOR_OPERATORS` are provided to allow users to conditionally enable arithmetic operators of HIP complex or vector types.

Note, the two macros are mutually exclusive and, by default, set to Off.

The arithmetic operators of HIP complex and vector types will be removed in a future release.

Refer to the HIP API Guide for more information.

#### Warning - Compiler-Generated Code Object Version 4 Deprecation

Support for loading compiler-generated code object version 4 will be deprecated in a future release with no release announcement and replaced with code object 5 as the default version.

The current default is code object version 4.

#### Warning - MIOpenTensile Deprecation

MIOpenTensile will be deprecated in a future release.

### Library Changes in ROCM 5.0.0

| Library | Version |
|---------|---------|
| hipBLAS |  ⇒ [0.49.0](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/hipBLAS/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.0) |
| hipCUB |  ⇒ [2.10.13](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/hipCUB/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.0) |
| hipFFT |  ⇒ [1.0.4](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/hipFFT/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.0) |
| hipSOLVER |  ⇒ [1.2.0](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/hipSOLVER/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.0) |
| hipSPARSE |  ⇒ [2.0.0](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/hipSPARSE/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.0) |
| rccl |  ⇒ [2.10.3](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/rccl/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.0) |
| rocALUTION |  ⇒ [2.0.1](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/rocALUTION/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.0) |
| rocBLAS |  ⇒ [2.42.0](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/rocBLAS/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.0) |
| rocFFT |  ⇒ [1.0.13](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/rocFFT/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.0) |
| rocPRIM |  ⇒ [2.10.12](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/rocPRIM/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.0) |
| rocRAND |  ⇒ [2.10.12](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/rocRAND/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.0) |
| rocSOLVER |  ⇒ [3.16.0](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/rocSOLVER/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.0) |
| rocSPARSE |  ⇒ [2.0.0](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/rocSPARSE/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.0) |
| rocThrust |  ⇒ [2.13.0](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/rocThrust/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.0) |
| Tensile |  ⇒ [4.31.0](https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/Tensile/releases/tag/rocm-5.0.0) |

#### hipBLAS 0.49.0

hipBLAS 0.49.0 for ROCm 5.0.0

##### Added

- Added rocSOLVER functions to hipblas-bench
- Added option ROCM_MATHLIBS_API_USE_HIP_COMPLEX to opt-in to use hipFloatComplex and hipDoubleComplex
- Added compilation warning for future trmm changes
- Added documentation to hipblas.h
- Added option to forgo pivoting for getrf and getri when ipiv is nullptr
- Added code coverage option

##### Fixed

- Fixed use of incorrect &#39;HIP_PATH&#39; when building from source.
- Fixed windows packaging
- Allowing negative increments in hipblas-bench
- Removed boost dependency

#### hipCUB 2.10.13

hipCUB 2.10.13 for ROCm 5.0.0

##### Fixed

- Added missing includes to hipcub.hpp

##### Added

- Bfloat16 support to test cases (device_reduce &amp; device_radix_sort)
- Device merge sort
- Block merge sort
- API update to CUB 1.14.0

##### Changed

- The SetupNVCC.cmake automatic target selector select all of the capabalities of all available card for NVIDIA backend.

#### hipFFT 1.0.4

hipFFT 1.0.4 for ROCm 5.0.0

##### Fixed

- Add calls to rocFFT setup/cleanup.
- Cmake fixes for clients and backend support.

##### Added

- Added support for Windows 10 as a build target.

#### hipSOLVER 1.2.0

hipSOLVER 1.2.0 for ROCm 5.0.0

##### Added

- Added functions
  - sytrf
    - hipsolverSsytrf_bufferSize, hipsolverDsytrf_bufferSize, hipsolverCsytrf_bufferSize, hipsolverZsytrf_bufferSize
    - hipsolverSsytrf, hipsolverDsytrf, hipsolverCsytrf, hipsolverZsytrf

##### Fixed

- Fixed use of incorrect `HIP_PATH` when building from source (#40).
  Thanks [@jakub329homola](https://github.com/jakub329homola)!

#### hipSPARSE 2.0.0

hipSPARSE 2.0.0 for ROCm 5.0.0

##### Added

- Added (conjugate) transpose support for csrmv, hybmv and spmv routines

#### rccl 2.10.3

RCCL 2.10.3 for ROCm 5.0.0

##### Added

- Compatibility with NCCL 2.10.3

##### Known Issues

- Managed memory is not currently supported for clique-based kernels

#### rocALUTION 2.0.1

rocALUTION 2.0.1 for ROCm 5.0.0

##### Changed

- Removed deprecated GlobalPairwiseAMG class, please use PairwiseAMG instead.
- Changed to C++ 14 Standard

##### Improved

- Added sanitizer option
- Improved documentation

#### rocBLAS 2.42.0

rocBLAS 2.42.0 for ROCm 5.0.0

##### Added

- Added rocblas_get_version_string_size convenience function
- Added rocblas_xtrmm_outofplace, an out-of-place version of rocblas_xtrmm
- Added hpl and trig initialization for gemm_ex to rocblas-bench
- Added source code gemm. It can be used as an alternative to Tensile for debugging and development
- Added option ROCM_MATHLIBS_API_USE_HIP_COMPLEX to opt-in to use hipFloatComplex and hipDoubleComplex

##### Optimizations

- Improved performance of non-batched and batched single-precision GER for size m &gt; 1024. Performance enhanced by 5-10% measured on a MI100 (gfx908) GPU.
- Improved performance of non-batched and batched HER for all sizes and data types. Performance enhanced by 2-17% measured on a MI100 (gfx908) GPU.

##### Changed

- Instantiate templated rocBLAS functions to reduce size of librocblas.so
- Removed static library dependency on msgpack
- Removed boost dependencies for clients

##### Fixed

- Option to install script to build only rocBLAS clients with a pre-built rocBLAS library
- Correctly set output of nrm2_batched_ex and nrm2_strided_batched_ex when given bad input
- Fix for dgmm with side == rocblas_side_left and a negative incx
- Fixed out-of-bounds read for small trsm
- Fixed numerical checking for tbmv_strided_batched

#### rocFFT 1.0.13

rocFFT 1.0.13 for ROCm 5.0.0

##### Optimizations

- Improved many plans by removing unnecessary transpose steps.
- Optimized scheme selection for 3D problems.
  - Imposed less restrictions on 3D_BLOCK_RC selection. More problems can use 3D_BLOCK_RC and
    have some performance gain.
  - Enabled 3D_RC. Some 3D problems with SBCC-supported z-dim can use less kernels and get benefit.
  - Force --length 336 336 56 (dp) use faster 3D_RC to avoid it from being skipped by conservative
    threshold test.
- Optimized some even-length R2C/C2R cases by doing more operations
  in-place and combining pre/post processing into Stockham kernels.
- Added radix-17.

##### Added

- Added new kernel generator for select fused-2D transforms.

##### Fixed

- Improved large 1D transform decompositions.

#### rocPRIM 2.10.12

rocPRIM 2.10.12 for ROCm 5.0.0

##### Fixed

- Enable bfloat16 tests and reduce threshold for bfloat16
- Fix device scan limit_size feature
- Non-optimized builds no longer trigger local memory limit errors

##### Added

- Added scan size limit feature
- Added reduce size limit feature
- Added transform size limit feature
- Add block_load_striped and block_store_striped
- Add gather_to_blocked to gather values from other threads into a blocked arrangement
- The block sizes for device merge sorts initial block sort and its merge steps are now separate in its kernel config
    - the block sort step supports multiple items per thread

##### Changed

- size_limit for scan, reduce and transform can now be set in the config struct instead of a parameter
- Device_scan and device_segmented_scan: `inclusive_scan` now uses the input-type as accumulator-type, `exclusive_scan` uses initial-value-type.
  - This particularly changes behaviour of small-size input types with large-size output types (e.g. `short` input, `int` output).
  - And low-res input with high-res output (e.g. `float` input, `double` output)
- Revert old Fiji workaround, because they solved the issue at compiler side
- Update README cmake minimum version number
- Block sort support multiple items per thread
    - currently only powers of two block sizes, and items per threads are supported and only for full blocks
- Bumped the minimum required version of CMake to 3.16

##### Known Issues

- Unit tests may soft hang on MI200 when running in hipMallocManaged mode.
- device_segmented_radix_sort, device_scan unit tests failing for HIP on Windows
- ReduceEmptyInput cause random faulire with bfloat16

#### rocRAND 2.10.12

rocRAND 2.10.12 for ROCm 5.0.0

##### Changed

- No updates or changes for ROCm 5.0.0.

#### rocSOLVER 3.16.0

rocSOLVER 3.16.0 for ROCm 5.0.0

##### Added

- Symmetric matrix factorizations:
    - LASYF
    - SYTF2, SYTRF (with batched and strided\_batched versions)
- Added `rocsolver_get_version_string_size` to help with version string queries
- Added `rocblas_layer_mode_ex` and the ability to print kernel calls in the trace and profile logs
- Expanded batched and strided\_batched sample programs.

##### Optimized

- Improved general performance of LU factorization
- Increased parallelism of specialized kernels when compiling from source, reducing build times on multi-core systems.

##### Changed

- The rocsolver-test client now prints the rocSOLVER version used to run the tests,
  rather than the version used to build them
- The rocsolver-bench client now prints the rocSOLVER version used in the benchmark

##### Fixed

- Added missing stdint.h include to rocsolver.h

#### rocSPARSE 2.0.0

rocSPARSE 2.0.0 for ROCm 5.0.0

##### Added

- csrmv, coomv, ellmv, hybmv for (conjugate) transposed matrices
- csrmv for symmetric matrices

##### Changed

- spmm\_ex is now deprecated and will be removed in the next major release

##### Improved

- Optimization for gtsv

#### rocThrust 2.13.0

rocThrust 2.13.0 for ROCm 5.0.0

##### Added

- Updated to match upstream Thrust 1.13.0
- Updated to match upstream Thrust 1.14.0
- Added async scan

##### Changed

- Scan algorithms: `inclusive_scan` now uses the input-type as accumulator-type, `exclusive_scan` uses initial-value-type.
    - This particularly changes behaviour of small-size input types with large-size output types (e.g. `short` input, `int` output).
    - And low-res input with high-res output (e.g. `float` input, `double` output)

#### Tensile 4.31.0

Tensile 4.31.0 for ROCm 5.0.0

##### Added

- DirectToLds support (x2/x4)
- DirectToVgpr support for DGEMM
- Parameter to control number of files kernels are merged into to better parallelize kernel compilation
- FP16 alternate implementation for HPA HGEMM on aldebaran

##### Optimized

- Add DGEMM NN custom kernel for HPL on aldebaran

##### Changed

- Update tensile_client executable to std=c++14

##### Removed

- Remove unused old Tensile client code

##### Fixed

- Fix hipErrorInvalidHandle during benchmarks
- Fix addrVgpr for atomic GSU
- Fix for Python 3.8: add case for Constant nodeType
- Fix architecture mapping for gfx1011 and gfx1012
- Fix PrintSolutionRejectionReason verbiage in KernelWriter.py
- Fix vgpr alignment problem when enabling flat buffer load
